Namaskaram Sadhguru I was wondering how the practice of
touching a guru's or elder's feet to get their blessing came
about.
Sadhguru, there is a whole technology about how to hold the
feet.
I am not just about to explain that.
Then I know what happens to my walking.
Already people are taking lot of pleasure and pulling my leg.
Now if I tell them this is the way to touch the guru's feet to
receive the maximum of this is today.
The neurosciences will also prove this to you, that your
hands, your palm and your feet have maximum amount of
neurological activity if you are sensitive.
If you touch anything with your hands, you will limitedly know
what it is.
If you touch it with your shoulder, you will not know what
it is.
If you touch it with your back, you will not know what it is.
If you touch it with the back of your head, you will not know
what it is, but you touch it with your hand immediately you
will know what it is, not just in terms of feeling and
sensation.
Much deeper perception happens with your hands.
So when it comes to receiving, hands are powerful instruments.
But if you want to give you energies to something, feet are
very powerful instruments.
There is a certain way to use your hands and feet with your
hands.
We are teaching you mudras.
These are certain ways of using your hands for your benefit.
How many mudras are you doing?
6,7,4,5,6, I think 6 or 7 mudras.
Pub.
So this is the technology of using the hand.
There are dozens of mudras used for different purposes.
With some you can restrain your energies, With some you can
dissipate your energies.
Feet are of a different kind.
There are people.
We did this at one time.
We gave it up because it's such an elaborate process.
We were teaching people how to, you know, manipulate one's feet
to different states of experience.
Want to relax somebody?
Where to press.
If you want to make somebody blissful, where to press?
If you want to make somebody loving where to press
everything, all the seven different chakras are in your
feet.
If you know how to handle this, you can do many things with the
whole system just by operating the feet about touching or
holding feet which are of a certain level of energy.
First of all, people should have something to give.
If you go and ask for a loan for somebody who is a Papa, that's
no good.
If you want to ask for a loan, you must ask from somebody who
has it, yes?
So you don't go and hold somebody's feet when he himself
is bankrupt.
If he's bursting with energies and he's willing to share.
Now there is a certain way to connect.
It is like a plug point.
There's a certain way to connect.
Now, plug points come in different ways.
It's a big battle if you travel internationally.
My my hand baggage has a multi plug which goes into
international fittings everywhere and I have about 7 or
8 chargers in it.
Every time it goes through the security, they get so suspicious
that I must be carrying a bomb because so many wires and so
many things because now this is a big corn job everywhere.
If you buy this phone today, it's got one kind of charger.
After two years you had to buy an attachment for that something
that's got another kind of charger.
You you buy another company, something else, you have another
kind of charger.
So ultimately I am carrying more than half a dozen chargers and a
multi pin and all electrical connections like I'm some kind
of an electrician or a bomb maker.
I don't wear my turban otherwise for sure.
So if you want to connect to that particular plug point, you
need a particular kind of plug.
You go to Europe, it's one way UK, another way United States.
Of course they're different.
II another way or the rest of the world another way.
Wherever you go, it's a *******
different plug point.
And except in Asia, I don't know why this is.
Except in Asia, if you want to plug your cell phone, you have
to crawl under a table or a cot or something in American hotels,
wherever you go.
Have you seen this in India?
Always.
It's next to your bed.
Light switch is next to your bed.
That's the only way.
Otherwise people won't stay in that hotel in United States for
some reason.
I'm still trying to understand why always the light switch is
somewhere else.
You have to switch it off and come and sleep.
And the plug point is always under the you have to crawl and
and you don't know which plug is going to go in there.
It's a struggle.
So this holding of somebody's feet is just like this.
If someone is a, let's say you have the tradition or habit of
touching the feet of your elders.
HM in many homes it is still there, right?
Probably in South India, it's gone.
In North India, it's still very much there because of the Vedic
culture.
So when they see a father, a mother, uncle, anybody elder to
them, they will first thing is touch their feet.
So that is only for respect.
You don't want to receive their energy, that is to offer you
respects to them.
So that's one way of doing it.
You want to receive their energy, your uncle's energy.
You see a deity, another way of doing it.
If you do Namaskar or frustration to a powerful being,
not spiritually evolved, but powerful in his own way, there
is another way of doing.
If you bow down to your guru, there's another way of doing.
As I said, I don't want to go into these technologies.
I can tell you the other three, but I don't want to tell you how
to bow down to a guru.
Whichever way you feel, you do it that way because I don't want
my legs pulled and held all the time.
HM once a day, so a few 100
people once a day.
Better to leave my feet and walk wooden legs.
So we are preparing Rasapada solidified mercury feet, which
are consecrated and energized by me in a certain way.
I can give it to you, you can do it every day, 12 times a day you
can do no problem.
Not my feet.
So the receptivity where it is in your hand and the giving
nature of the feet where it is.
If these two things are connected, what you cannot
achieve in years and years of sadhana, you may achieve in a
moment.
It is with that hope everybody is diving and diving and diving
all the time that they may somewhere connect.
So it is.
People probably think probably this part of the world, people
understand that as a kind of subjugation or slavery, that
somebody is falling at somebody's feet.
In the yogic tradition, we never thought feet was less than the
hands.
It was never seen that way that one part of the body is less
than the other.
So wherever it works, that's how you do it, because it's down
there.
You have to go down.
There is no other way unless you catch him when he is doing
headstand.
But then on top of that you have to go on headstand to get into
right position, which is a very acrobatic thing to do.
So it's best to catch him when he is standing or walking so
people dies.
There are certain traditions in the country.
When they come to me, I'm amazed that these things have been
taught to them from their childhood.
They know exactly how to do it.
But most other people are just doing it by their emotion.
Sometimes they may get it right.
So some people, so that they don't make the mistake, they
just touch all the parts like this, like this, like this, like
this.
Have you seen this?
It's only Indian people because they know they have missed the
technology, so they want to somehow connect.
They'll hold the bottom like this, like that.
It doesn't matter.
The guru falls and breaks his head.
They'll put their hands under his feet and wherever it is,
they want to get it.
It's a treasure hunt, so, so that is the reason why whenever
the crowds increased, the gurus always created an energy form.
They said go bow down to that to save their own feet.
So we can create an energy form to which you can bow down and
receive which is better.
These are walking feet.
The energy forms cannot walk away from you.
You can bow down as many times as you want per day.
They cannot resist and it's OK.
So there is a whole technology of doing that, Sashtang.
You're doing Sashtang as one of the postures when you're doing
Surinamaskar.
Sashtang means it's eight points in the body at touching the
floor.
That's the first step of preparation before 1 bows down.
The next we'll leave it.